README.md, before:

# BirdDex

A photo-first bird identification and life list tracker built on [GitHub Spark](https://github.com/features/spark). Upload your bird photos, let AI identify the species, and build your personal BirdDex over time.

**[Try it →](https://birddex--jlian.github.app)**

<img width="1133" height="913" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/86636186-bef4-45cb-becc-3760ff9951c2" />

## What is BirdDex?

BirdDex is for **reverse birding**: people who take photos first and identify species later. Instead of checklists and field guides, you upload photos you already took, and AI handles the species identification. You just confirm with a tap.

**Your photos are never stored.** They're used only during identification and immediately discarded. Upload a whole day's worth of photos at once via the **batch upload wizard**, which clusters them into outings, identifies each bird, and lets you confirm results in one flow. Every species in your BirdDex links back to the outings where you saw it, and every outing links to its species in the BirdDex — so you can always **cross-reference between your BirdDex and your field trips**.

### Features

- **Privacy-first** - Photos are never stored; all bird imagery comes from Wikipedia
- **Batch upload** - Drop a day's photos; they're auto-grouped into outings by time/GPS proximity, merged with existing sessions, and deduplicated by hash
- **EXIF extraction** - GPS, timestamps, and thumbnails parsed client-side
- **AI species ID** - GPT-4.1 vision returns ranked candidates with confidence scores and bounding boxes, grounded against ~11,000 eBird species
- **BirdDex Life list** - First/last seen, total sightings, Wikipedia imagery; searchable and sortable
- **Species detail** - Hero image, Wikipedia summary, sighting history, and links to eBird / All About Birds
- **Outing management** - Editable locations/notes, taxonomy autocomplete, per-observation delete, eBird CSV export, Google Maps links
- **eBird integration** - Import/export checklists and life lists in eBird Record Format
- **Dark mode** - Light, dark, and system themes
- **Saved locations** - Bookmark birding spots with geolocation and nearby outing counts
- **Dashboard** - Stats, recent activity, and highlights at a glance

## How it works

1. **Upload** bird photos from your device
2. **EXIF** GPS & timestamps are extracted and photos are clustered into outings
3. **Review** the outing — confirm date, location (auto-geocoded), and notes
4. **AI identifies** each bird with ranked suggestions, confidence scores, and a crop box
5. **Confirm** — accept, mark as possible, pick an alternative, re-crop, or skip
6. **Saved** to your BirdDex with species, count, and confidence

## Tech stack

| Layer | Technology |
|-------|------------|
| Platform | [GitHub Spark](https://github.com/features/spark) - hosting, KV storage, LLM proxy, GitHub auth |
| Frontend | React 19, TypeScript, Vite 7 |
| Styling | Tailwind CSS 4, Radix UI primitives, Phosphor Icons |
| AI | GPT-4.1 (vision) via Spark's `/_spark/llm` proxy |
| Geocoding | OpenStreetMap Nominatim |
| Bird imagery | Wikipedia REST API |
| Testing | Vitest (unit), Playwright (e2e) |

## Development

### Prerequisites

This is a GitHub Spark app. The recommended way to develop is inside Spark's Codespace editor, where the dev server starts automatically on port 5000.

### Running locally

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jlian/birddex.git
cd birddex
npm ci
npm run dev
```

For reproducible installs and stable lockfile output, use `Node 22.16.x` and `npm 10.9.x`.

> **Note:** AI features (bird detection, species ID) require the `/_spark/llm` proxy and will not work outside of the Spark runtime. Everything else (photo upload, EXIF parsing, outing management, BirdDex browsing) works normally.

### Scripts

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `npm run dev` | Start Vite dev server (port 5000) |
| `npm run build` | Type-check and production build |
| `npm run test` | Run all tests (Vitest) |
| `npm run test:unit` | Run unit tests only |
| `npm run test:e2e` | Run end-to-end tests (Playwright) |
| `npm run setup:playwright` | Install Playwright Chromium + Linux deps |
| `npm run test:watch` | Run tests in watch mode |
| `npm run lint` | Lint with ESLint |
| `npm run preview` | Preview production build |

In Codespaces, `.vscode/tasks.json` runs `bootstrap-workspace` on folder open to bootstrap ephemeral environments. It installs Playwright dependencies and only starts `npm run dev` when nothing is already serving `http://localhost:5000`. If prompted, allow automatic tasks for this workspace.

### Releases (automated semver + tags)

- PR titles must follow semantic commit style (for example `feat: add outing merge UX` or `fix: handle wiki 404 fallback`).
- On push to `main`, Release Please opens/updates a release PR and calculates the next semantic version:
  - `feat` → minor
  - `fix`/`perf`/`refactor` and other non-breaking types → patch
  - `!` or `BREAKING CHANGE:` → major
- Merging the release PR updates `package.json`, updates `CHANGELOG.md`, and creates the Git tag/release (for example `v1.3.0`).

## Security notes

- BirdDex is designed for **low-sensitivity personal birding data** (outings, observations, notes).
- Data separation is implemented with **user-scoped storage keys** (for example `u123_photos`) and app-level runtime checks.
- In hosted Spark runtime, BirdDex requires a valid Spark user session and does not fall back to a shared dev identity.
- In local/dev runtime, storage uses browser localStorage and should be treated as development-only data storage.
- If you need strong tenant isolation for sensitive data, use a backend that enforces per-user access server-side.

## License

[MIT](LICENSE)

Commit message:

feat: rename BirdDex to WingDex across app (#129)
## Summary
- Rename app and collection naming from **BirdDex** to **WingDex**
across UI, routes, symbols, docs, tests, and scripts
- Rename core files:
- `src/components/pages/BirdDexPage.tsx` ->
`src/components/pages/WingDexPage.tsx`
  - `src/hooks/use-birddex-data.ts` -> `src/hooks/use-wingdex-data.ts`
- Update route/tab key from `birddex` to `wingdex`
- Update manifests/meta/title/package metadata to WingDex
- Update exports and copy (`wingdex-export-*`, `wingdex-outing-*`,
toasts/labels/text)
- Update repo/app URL references to `jlian/wingdex` and
`wingdex--jlian.github.app`
- Simplify storage handling by **not** adding legacy key migration (per
decision)
- Fix VS Code verify flow by removing unsupported Playwright `--quiet`
flag from `setup:playwright`
- Make `setup-playwright` task quieter using `npm --silent`

## Verification
- `npm run verify`
  - lint ✅
  - unit tests ✅ (22 files, 429 tests)
  - e2e ✅ (32 tests)
  - build ✅

## Next Steps

- [ ] 1. Merge this PR
- [x] 2. Rename the GitHub repository from `jlian/birddex` to
`jlian/wingdex` (GitHub redirects old links)
- [ ] 3. Confirm the Spark hosted URL transition is live and accessible
- [ ] 4. Optional: clear old localStorage keys (`birddex_kv_*`,
`birddex_dev_user_id`) in existing browsers
- [ ] 5. Optional: if changelog body links should remain historical,
keep as-is; if preferred, run a follow-up to align all changelog links
to the new slug

README.md, after:

# WingDex

A photo-first bird identification and life list tracker built on [GitHub Spark](https://github.com/features/spark). Upload your bird photos, let AI identify the species, and build your personal WingDex over time.

**[Try it →](https://wingdex--jlian.github.app)**

<img width="1133" height="913" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/86636186-bef4-45cb-becc-3760ff9951c2" />

## What is WingDex?

WingDex is for **reverse birding**: people who take photos first and identify species later. Instead of checklists and field guides, you upload photos you already took, and AI handles the species identification. You just confirm with a tap.

**Your photos are never stored.** They're used only during identification and immediately discarded. Upload a whole day's worth of photos at once via the **batch upload wizard**, which clusters them into outings, identifies each bird, and lets you confirm results in one flow. Every species in your WingDex links back to the outings where you saw it, and every outing links to its species in the WingDex — so you can always **cross-reference between your WingDex and your field trips**.

### Features

- **Privacy-first** - Photos are never stored; all bird imagery comes from Wikipedia
- **Batch upload** - Drop a day's photos; they're auto-grouped into outings by time/GPS proximity, merged with existing sessions, and deduplicated by hash
- **EXIF extraction** - GPS, timestamps, and thumbnails parsed client-side
- **AI species ID** - GPT-4.1 vision returns ranked candidates with confidence scores and bounding boxes, grounded against ~11,000 eBird species
- **WingDex Life list** - First/last seen, total sightings, Wikipedia imagery; searchable and sortable
- **Species detail** - Hero image, Wikipedia summary, sighting history, and links to eBird / All About Birds
- **Outing management** - Editable locations/notes, taxonomy autocomplete, per-observation delete, eBird CSV export, Google Maps links
- **eBird integration** - Import/export checklists and life lists in eBird Record Format
- **Dark mode** - Light, dark, and system themes
- **Saved locations** - Bookmark birding spots with geolocation and nearby outing counts
- **Dashboard** - Stats, recent activity, and highlights at a glance

## How it works

1. **Upload** bird photos from your device
2. **EXIF** GPS & timestamps are extracted and photos are clustered into outings
3. **Review** the outing — confirm date, location (auto-geocoded), and notes
4. **AI identifies** each bird with ranked suggestions, confidence scores, and a crop box
5. **Confirm** — accept, mark as possible, pick an alternative, re-crop, or skip
6. **Saved** to your WingDex with species, count, and confidence

## Tech stack

| Layer | Technology |
|-------|------------|
| Platform | [GitHub Spark](https://github.com/features/spark) - hosting, KV storage, LLM proxy, GitHub auth |
| Frontend | React 19, TypeScript, Vite 7 |
| Styling | Tailwind CSS 4, Radix UI primitives, Phosphor Icons |
| AI | GPT-4.1 (vision) via Spark's `/_spark/llm` proxy |
| Geocoding | OpenStreetMap Nominatim |
| Bird imagery | Wikipedia REST API |
| Testing | Vitest (unit), Playwright (e2e) |

## Development

### Prerequisites

This is a GitHub Spark app. The recommended way to develop is inside Spark's Codespace editor, where the dev server starts automatically on port 5000.

### Running locally

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jlian/wingdex.git
cd wingdex
npm ci
npm run dev
```

For reproducible installs and stable lockfile output, use `Node 22.16.x` and `npm 10.9.x`.

> **Note:** AI features (bird detection, species ID) require the `/_spark/llm` proxy and will not work outside of the Spark runtime. Everything else (photo upload, EXIF parsing, outing management, WingDex browsing) works normally.

### Scripts

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `npm run dev` | Start Vite dev server (port 5000) |
| `npm run build` | Type-check and production build |
| `npm run test` | Run all tests (Vitest) |
| `npm run test:unit` | Run unit tests only |
| `npm run test:e2e` | Run end-to-end tests (Playwright) |
| `npm run setup:playwright` | Install Playwright Chromium + Linux deps |
| `npm run test:watch` | Run tests in watch mode |
| `npm run lint` | Lint with ESLint |
| `npm run preview` | Preview production build |

In Codespaces, `.vscode/tasks.json` runs `bootstrap-workspace` on folder open to bootstrap ephemeral environments. It installs Playwright dependencies and only starts `npm run dev` when nothing is already serving `http://localhost:5000`. If prompted, allow automatic tasks for this workspace.

### Releases (automated semver + tags)

- PR titles must follow semantic commit style (for example `feat: add outing merge UX` or `fix: handle wiki 404 fallback`).
- On push to `main`, Release Please opens/updates a release PR and calculates the next semantic version:
  - `feat` → minor
  - `fix`/`perf`/`refactor` and other non-breaking types → patch
  - `!` or `BREAKING CHANGE:` → major
- Merging the release PR updates `package.json`, updates `CHANGELOG.md`, and creates the Git tag/release (for example `v1.3.0`).

## Security notes

- WingDex is designed for **low-sensitivity personal birding data** (outings, observations, notes).
- Data separation is implemented with **user-scoped storage keys** (for example `u123_photos`) and app-level runtime checks.
- In hosted Spark runtime, WingDex requires a valid Spark user session and does not fall back to a shared dev identity.
- In local/dev runtime, storage uses browser localStorage and should be treated as development-only data storage.
- If you need strong tenant isolation for sensitive data, use a backend that enforces per-user access server-side.

## License

[MIT](LICENSE)
